Welcome to the next
week of our course
on parallel functional
programming with Java.
Now that we've covered the Java
parallel Streams framework,
we'll drop down a
level of abstraction
and start exploring Java
ForkJoinPools, which
provide the parallel
computing infrastructure used
by both parallel Streams and
the Java CompletableFuture's
framework.
The Fork/Join framework
provides a high-performance and
fine-grained task execution
engine for object-oriented data
parallelism.
This framework consists
of several public classes,
including ForkJoinPool,
ForkJoinTask, RecursiveTask,
and RecursiveAction.
ForkJoinPool implements the
ExecutorService interface
and executes Fork/Join tasks
within a pool of worker threads
it manages in a very clever way.
A Fork/Join task
associates a chunk
of data along with a
computation on that data.
Since it's lighter weight
than a Java thread,
a large number of
Fork/Join tasks
can run scalably atop a much
smaller number of Java threads
in a Fork/Join pool.
Application programs rarely
implement Fork/Join tasks
directly.
But instead, they extend
one of its subclasses,
such as RecursiveTask
or RecursiveAction,
and override the compute
hook method in those classes
to have their computations
performed in parallel.
After describing the APIs of
ForkJoinPool, ForkJoinTask,
RecursiveTask, and
RecursiveAction,
we turn our attention
to the inner workings
of the Java Fork/Join
framework, which
is based on a pool
of worker threads
that implement the
so-called Work Stealing
model of parallel computing.
In this model, each worker
thread and the Fork/Join pool
has a double-ended
queue, or DEQ,
that manages tasks it executes
in parallel with other worker
threads in the pool.
A key design goal of the
Java Fork/Join framework
is to maximize processor
core utilization
by not blocking cores unless
there are absolutely no tasks
to run since putting
a core to sleep
by blocking it is a
very costly operation
on moderate processors.
Therefore, if a potentially
idle worker thread
has no more tasks
in its deck, it
checks the decks of other
worker threads in the pool
to see if they have tasks
that aren't being processed.
If such a task is found,
potentially, Idle Worker thread
steals that task from the end
of the other thread's deck
and executes it,
thereby increasing
processor core utilization.
The Fork/Join framework
is powerful and scalable.
But it's also complex.
So don't be surprised if our
discussion of its internals
takes a while to digest.